# manatee-adm(1) -- Administration tools for Manatee


## SYNOPSIS

`manatee-adm [OPTIONS] COMMAND [ARGS...]`


## DESCRIPTION

The `manatee-adm` command is used to administer a Manatee shard.

## COMMANDS

### version [-h]

Display the version of the software for this manatee peer.  It is taken directly
from the package.json in the manatee.git repo.

### status [-hsl] -z

Display the status of the current manatee shard. By default, the status for
every shard is returned.

-h, --help
    Displays a help message.

-l, --legacyOrderMode
    Disply the topology based on the order in `/election`, as was the way the
    topology was determined in Manatee 1.0.

-s, --shard shard
    Display status for the specified shard only.

-z, --zk Zookeeper url
    Zookeeper url (such as `10.0.1.1:2181`)

The output is a JSON object which encapsulates the state of the Manatee shard.
Each peer in the shard is denoted by its role in the shard, which will be
either `primary`, `sync`, or `async`. If there are greater than 3 peers in the
shard, each additional peer will be denoted `asyncn`, where n is a
monotonically increasing integer starting at 1.

The "online" field indicates if postgres is currently running.

The output also indicates whether the topology is frozen for that shard as well
as any deposed peers.  Deposed peers are displayed in a similar to how asyncs
are displayed.

The `repl` field contains postgresql replication information of the next peer
in the shard. On the primary, this would be the `sync` peer, and on the `sync`
this would be the `async` peer.

```
"1.moray.emy-10.joyent.us": {
  "primary": {
    "id": "172.27.10.242:5432:12345",
    "zoneId": "31f40985-9578-48b1-a92c-062d1329008b",
    "ip": "172.27.10.242",
    "pgUrl": "tcp://postgres@172.27.10.242:5432/postgres",
    "backupUrl": "http://172.27.10.242:12345",
    "online": true,
    "repl": {
      "pid": 41435,
      "usesysid": 10,
      "usename": "postgres",
      "application_name": "tcp://postgres@172.27.10.238:5432/postgres",
      "client_addr": "172.27.10.238",
      "client_hostname": "",
      "client_port": 62784,
      "backend_start": "2014-08-20T00:22:07.802Z",
      "state": "streaming",
      "sent_location": "0/177D7C0",
      "write_location": "0/177D7C0",
      "flush_location": "0/177D7C0",
      "replay_location": "0/177D7C0",
      "sync_priority": 1,
      "sync_state": "sync"
    }
  },
  "sync": {
    "id": "172.27.10.238:5432:12345",
    "zoneId": "5d5b386a-29ff-410b-80ae-a63f74ced656",
    "ip": "172.27.10.238",
    "pgUrl": "tcp://postgres@172.27.10.238:5432/postgres",
    "backupUrl": "http://172.27.10.238:12345",
    "online": true,
    "repl": {
      "pid": 41417,
      "usesysid": 10,
      "usename": "postgres",
      "application_name": "tcp://postgres@172.27.10.254:5432/postgres",
      "client_addr": "172.27.10.254",
      "client_hostname": "",
      "client_port": 36209,
      "backend_start": "2014-08-20T00:22:02.350Z",
      "state": "streaming",
      "sent_location": "0/177D7C0",
      "write_location": "0/177D7C0",
      "flush_location": "0/177D7C0",
      "replay_location": "0/177D7C0",
      "sync_priority": 0,
      "sync_state": "async"
    }
  },
  "async": {
    "id": "172.27.10.254:5432:12345",
    "zoneId": "c4f07ca7-7249-463e-b7e3-e9e8b49b4535",
    "ip": "172.27.10.254",
    "pgUrl": "tcp://postgres@172.27.10.254:5432/postgres",
    "backupUrl": "http://172.27.10.254:12345",
    "online": true,
    "repl": {},
    "lag": {
      "time_lag": null
    }
  }
}
```

### state

Gets the cluster state object from zookeeper and display it.

-h, --help
    Displays a help message.

-s, --shard shard
    Shard name.

-z, --zk Zookeeper url
    Zookeeper url (such as `10.0.1.1:2181`)

This is the canonical object that all manatee peers use to configure themselves.

### active

Gets the list of active manatee peers currently registered in zk.

-h, --help
    Displays a help message.

-s, --shard shard
    Shard name.

-z, --zk Zookeeper url
    Zookeeper url (such as `10.0.1.1:2181`)

### state-backfill

Migration tool for moving from Manatee 1.0 to 2.0.  Please see the manatee
documentation on migration for the appropriate use of this tool.

-h, --help
    Displays a help message.

-s, --shard shard
    Shard name.

-z, --zk Zookeeper url
    Zookeeper url (such as `10.0.1.1:2181`)

### history [OPTIONS...]

Display the history of Manatee state transitions.  Each time a Manatee peer
writes cluster state, a copy is put under `/history` in zookeeper.  This tool
will order and display the

-h, --help
    Displays a help message.

-s, --shard shard
    Shard name.

-z, --zk Zookeeper url
    Zookeeper url (such as `10.0.1.1:2181`)

The output is newline separated JSON where each line is the time and updated
cluster state.  Note that history objects for Manatee 1.0 will also be included
in the output.  The format for these objects is included:

Each line contains the following fields:

* `time` MS since epoch of the transition event.
* `date` Time in UTC of the transition event.
* `state` The cluster state object at that time.
* `zkSeq` The zookeeper sequence number.

Each line for Manatee 1.0 changes contains the following fields.

* `time` MS since epoch of the transition event.
* `date` Time in UTC of the transition event.
* `ip` IP address of the peer.
* `action` Transition event type, one of
    * `AssumeLeader`, the peer has become the primary of this shard.
    * `NewLeader`, the peer has a new leader it's replicating from.
    * `NewStandby`, the peer has a new standby it's replicating to.
    * `ExpiredStandby`, the peer's current standby has expired from the shard.
* `role` Current role of the peer, one of `Leader` or `Standby`. The primary of
the shard will be `Leader`, and all other peers will be `Standby`.
* `master` Peer we are replicating from.
* `slave` Peer we are replicating to.
* `zkSeq` Internal tracker of the number of state transitions.

### rebuild [-hz] -c

Rebuild the current peer. In the event of this peer being unable to join the
cluster due to being a deposed primary or Postgres log divergence, this command
will attempt a rebuild. It will induce a full rebuild by receiving the full zfs
snapshot from its leader.

-h, --help
    Displays a help message.

-c, --config manatee sitter config
    Path to Manatee sitter config. (such as
    `/opt/smartdc/manatee/etc/sitter.cfg`)

-z, --zk Zookeeper url
    Zookeeper url (such as `10.0.1.1:2181`)

Use this tool carefully.  It should only be run if the primary is up and
operational.

### check-lock [-h] -pz

Check the existence of a lock path in Zookeeper. Returns 1 if the lock exists,
0 if it doesn't.

-h, --help
    Displays a help message.

-p, --path lock path
    Lock path in Zookeeper. (such as `/my_special_lock`)

-z, --zk Zookeeper url
    Zookeeper url (such as `10.0.1.1:2181`)

### freeze

This tool is for the times when an operator would like to "freeze" this shard so
that no state transitions will be made.  When the cluster is frozen, the reason
will be displayed when running `manatee-adm status`:

-h, --help
    Displays a help message.

-r --reason
    The reason the operator is freezing this shard.  It is a free-form string
    that will be displayed when displaying shard status.

-s, --shard shard
    Shard name.

-z, --zk Zookeeper url
    Zookeeper url (such as `10.0.1.1:2181`)

For example:

```
[root@b35e12da (postgres) ~]$ manatee-adm freeze -r 'By nate for CM-129'
Frozen.
[root@b35e12da (postgres) ~]$ manatee-adm status | json | head -5
{
  "1.moray.coal.joyent.us": {
    "__FROZEN__": "2014-12-10T18:20:35.758Z: By nate for CM-129",
    "primary": {
      "id": "10.77.77.8:5432:12345",
[root@b35e12da (postgres) ~]$
```

### unfreeze

Unfreezes the shard so that automatic topology changes are enabled.

-h, --help
    Displays a help message.

-s, --shard shard
    Shard name.

-z, --zk Zookeeper url
    Zookeeper url (such as `10.0.1.1:2181`)

### set-onwm

Turns One Node Write Mode on and off.  One node write mode is a special mode for
environments that do not contain important data.  It enables writes on the
primary without syncronous replication to the sync.  It requires the state in
zookeeper to match the state in your manatee configuration files so that it
isn't accidentally enabled.  Use with extreme caution.

-h, --help
    Displays a help message.

-s, --shard shard
    Shard name.

-m, --mode on|off
    Set one node write mode on or off.

-y, --ignorePrompts
    Sets one node write mode without confirmation.  Use with caution.

-z, --zk Zookeeper url
    Zookeeper url (such as `10.0.1.1:2181`)

### remove-deposed

***Warning***: Removing from deposed is done as part of the `rebuild` command.
Use this tool without rebuilding could cause your shard to wedge.

When a primary fails and the sync takes over as primary, the old primary is
moved into a "deposed" state.  Operators should normally rebuild a node, but in
certain circumstances this will not be possible (for example, if that peer was
deprovisioned).  This will remove a peer from the list of deposed peers.

By default will remove the current node.  Otherwise, pass in either the ip
address or the zonename.

-h, --help
    Displays a help message.

-c, --config manatee sitter config
    Path to Manatee sitter config. (such as
    `/opt/smartdc/manatee/etc/sitter.cfg`)

-i, --ip
    The ip address of the peer to remove.  Can be used in place of the Zonename.

-n, --zonename
    The zonename of the peer to remove.  Can be used in place of the ip address.

-s, --shard shard
    Shard name.

-z, --zk Zookeeper url
    Zookeeper url (such as `10.0.1.1:2181`)

## ENVIRONMENT

`ZK_IPS`
    In place of `-z, --zookeeper`

`SHARD`
    In place of `-s, --shard`

`MANATEE_SITTER_CONFIG`
    In place of `-c, --config`

`LOG_LEVEL`
    Sets the node-bunyan logging level. Defaults to fatal.


## COPYRIGHT


Copyright (c) 2014 Joyent Inc., All rights reserverd.
